# Synthesising Arena- and Hantavirus data from rodents to understand current known host distributions and viral pathogens

David Simons and Steph Seifert

Rodents are global hosts of zoonotic pathogens and potential hosts of novel pathogens of epidemic potential. Current efforts to catalogue host-pathogen associations in these species are limited to global datasets which lack temporal and geographic information. Current research is hindered by spatial-, host taxa- and temporal biases within these datasets that are challenging to quantify. Recent work within the Verena consortium has synthesised publicly available data on Alpha- and Beta-coronaviruses in bats which provides a template for this work to be expanded to rodents. In this proposal, I outline a project to expand on a database produced during my PhD studies on [rodent-pathogen associations in West Africa](https://github.com/DidDrog11/scoping_review) to a global scale and incorporating additional virus-host features which will support future hypothesis-testing. The proposed database will provide a novel and accessible resource to explore a range of questions at a global scale about rodents and their pathogens. 

The project will focus on two important, globally distributed, rodent-associated virus families which contain several known and potential zoonoses (Arenaviridae and Hantaviridae). These viruses have similarities in genomic architecture, segmented and negative sense, which allow us to ask questions about viral evolution, geography and niche-overlap. A literature search of peer-reviewed and pre-printed articles, alongside ecological reports and “grey” literature will be conducted and data extracted. Extracted data will contain information on host presence, the number of individuals identified, trapping or sampling effort, temporo-spatial information, and results from pathogen assays. Where possible, database records will be associated with pathogen sequences stored on repositories including GenBank and pathogenesis studies from experimental challenges in laboratory models. We will use these data to test the hypothesis that niche overlap facilitates viral reassortment between species and that reassortment is more likely to be detected between closely related viruses. Viral reassortment requires coinfection of a single cell within a host, allowing for genomic segments to be reassorted and packaged in budding virions. Reassortment between distantly related viruses is likely to result in nonviable virus particles and should be selected against, whereas reassortment between conspecific viruses facilitates rapid acquisition of potentially beneficial mutations and may improve fitness, particularly in genetic segments encoding for proteins that are highly immunogenic, or expand host breadth. Using a Bayesian stochastic search variable selection and GLM framework implemented in BEAST v2, we will determine the relative contributions of ecological, geographic, and genomic factors leading to cross-species transmission and reassortment in rodent-associated arenaviruses and hantaviruses.  
   
This project will provide an additional source of data for researchers across the Verena consortium and beyond. Future research could include exploration of changes in host or pathogen presence and the potential for spatio-temporal analysis of pathogen sharing. Based on prior work, I anticipate that most of the data synthesis for this project can be completed within a 3-month timeline, with initial searches and screening of the literature in month 1, and data extraction in months 2-3, which would coincide with development of the dataset and an accompanying tool to visualise the underlying data. Phylogenomic and generalized linear models can be implemented in months 4-6 including computational time. 

## Useful resources

https://www.bv-brc.org/ - BACTERIAL AND VIRAL BIOINFORMATICS RESOURCE CENTER
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/#/ - NCBI VIRUS
https://www.neonscience.org/ - NEON
